The Bass Process
pp 284–285 and 288–289, in
Saul Bass, A Life in Film & Design
by Jennifer Bass and Pat Kirkham

“We've developed a way of approaching the task that makes what we do more comprehensible to non-designers. It's a straightforward problem-solving technique that has come to be used by many design consultants these days.

It starts with a study and analysis phase, during which we arrive at the critical strategic decisions that will guide our efforts. There's nothing mysterious about what we do. We start by learning the client's business as thoroughly as we can. Products or services: we learn their history, their unique characteristics, their strengths, their weaknesses. We analyze competitors. Who is doing well or poorly and why.

We collect and analyze all the client's communication materials, everything that carries the corporation's identity. If market research exists, we enlist it. If it doesn't, we might recommend that it be undertaken, and though we don't do the research ourselves, we participate in creating the design of the research to make sure that our questions are answered.

By far the most important element of our study is the interviews with key company officers and personnel. In some companies we talk to the chief officers, the head of marketing and a few division heads. But in others it might be more important to talk to an outside member of the board, an assistant to the president or a key scientist. The point is that every company is different and must be approached as such.

The interviews themselves are the key to our study. Typically they occur after we have done our other homework. We meet with only one executive at a time. We promise confidentiality. We work from a questionnaire but not rigidly. The interview is planned to last forty-five minutes but usually spills over because there is always more to say than time will allow. It's among the most interesting aspect of my work. I get to ask powerful and often interesting people about their work and their lives. It is in their heads that the real blueprint for the future exists or is being formed.

Okay, by now we have the whole picture. Well maybe not everything, but a great deal. Only at this point are we prepared to devise a set of objectives for our design project. These objectives are the true road map of the work that will proceed from this point on. They tell us what is most important to communicate, and what's next most important, and so on.

These objectives are vital to us for two reasons: first because our ‘canvas’ is very small, and we will likely have to make hard choices about what to go for. Equally important is that we must have some rational basis for evaluating the work that will emerge. It's essential that we move away from the dreaded I like that, or I don't like that, syndrome.

At that point, having been intellectually rigorous, you can begin the process of design that cannot be rigorous in the same way. You go to work and the process becomes an odd amalgam of objective awareness and intuitive expression. But it's a process that we share with the client. We expose everything we've done — good, bad, or indifferent. We usually drop true dopiness. But it does occur. It's in the nature of the beast.

In presenting the work I might say we tried this, but it was too frivolous (or too didactic). And we tried that, which was rather promising. So we developed that further, but then it went over the edge and the notion became incomprehensible. Finally, there will be two or three designs that I think are really viable and worth considering seriously. We then review the original objectives to see how what we've done measures up.

But then I may point out that there's a place I go where they, the executives, can't follow. It has to do with my intuitive feeling about whether it's really going to fly. And that's a judgment that comes from inside me and results from my many years of thinking and worrying about these things. I might then make an assertion that I'm convinced that this will work. Or do a good job. (…)”

(…)

Harold Williams, “struck by Saul's ability to understand and capture what I wanted to convey,” utilized Saul's talents in one way or another for more than thirty-five years.

Williams recalled, (…) “It's atypical of many artists, but Saul starts with a systems approach, an effort to understand the problem and the objective, then to articulate it, and finally to translate what he's learned into an artistic solution. Often it turns out to be a different problem than the one that the client himself might articulate, but Saul really takes you along with him through all the steps, the logic of what he's doing, the process of elimination. There's an elegance to this artistry, but also a simplicity and modesty.”
